# Chapter 1: Getting Started
## 1.1 Installation

- run the command on unix

- ``$ curl --proto '=https' --tlsv1.2 https://sh.rustup.rs -sSf | sh``

- ``rustup`` is the tool that installs the latest stable version of Rust.
  
- If you use windows then solve my riddles 3 (WSL)
- yknow why is it called W.S.L
- the linux is the subsystem for windows
- You'll also need a Linker, a linker is a program that joins the compiled pieces of your code into one file
- If you don't have one just install a C compiler, it comes with one and it's also just convenient to have (some rust packages require it)
- use ``rustc --version`` to check your current version of rust
- ``rustc x.y.z (abcabcabc yyyy-mm-dd)``
- make sure it's added to your ``$PATH``
  
## 1.2 Hello World
- *how does one make a rust project?*
- well make a projects folder that everything will live in
- and all rust code files use the ``.rs`` file extension
- a style convention is to use underscores to seperate the words in your rust file name
- *what does rust code look like?*
```Rust
fn main() {
    println!("Hello, world!");
}
```
- simpler syntax then anticipated
- compiling and running are separate steps, like C
- use ``rustc`` to compile your code, then run the ``./main`` binary file to run the code.
- Rust is an ahead-of-time compiled language, meaning you can compile a program and give the executable to someone else, and they can run it even without having Rust installed.

### Anatomy of a Rust program 
```Rust
fn main() {

}
```
- the main function is always ran first.
- function bodies must be wrapped around by curly braces
```Rust
println!("Hello, world!");
```
- rust style is to indent with four spaces and not a tab. not sure how important this is to the compiler
- ``println!`` calls a Rust macro. writing ``println`` would've ran the function
- What's the diff between a function and a macro? 
- No clue. 
- All I know is that macros are like functions but down always follow the same rules

## 1.3 Hello, Cargo
- cargo is a build system and package manager for Rust
- it's like npm for Node (I think)
- It also makes running and building your rust projects easier
- cargo comes pre-installed with rust if you used the official installer

### Creating a project with cargo
- use ``cargo new hello_cargo`` to make a new rust project
- cargo has now set up a project for you (similar to npm init I THINK)
- it also has git set up (much to my dismay in this scenario)
- you can change the vcs it uses, or not use any vcs at all.
- it also comes with a ``Cargo.toml`` file
- it's like a package.json i think

```
[package]
name = "hello_cargo"
version = "0.1.0"
edition = "2021"

# See more keys and their definitions at https://doc.rust-lang.org/cargo/reference/manifest.html

[dependencies]
```
- config files are in toml (Tom's obvious minimal Language format),
the ``[package]`` header indicated that the following statements are configuring a package
- the next 3 lines are the name, version, and edition of rust to use 
- cargo needs to know this to compile your project
- the ``[dependencies] line is the start of a section for any packages your project needs to run
- packages in rust are referred to as crates
- rust also made a ``src`` directory along with a ``main.rs`` file for you to start writing your code.
- it's a hello world program like the one we just wrote
- to adapt any existing rust files into a cargo project, just put them in a ``src`` file and make the ``cargo.toml`` file yourself

### Building and running a cargo project
- running ``cargo build`` creates an binary file in ``./target/debug/hello_cargo``, you can then run that file like any other binary file
-  building your cargo project for the first time also makes a ``Cargo.lock`` file, which is used to manage version dependencies
- using ``cargo run`` compiles your code and then runs the binary. 
- using ``cargo check`` simply returns if your code complies, but doesn't actually create the binary.
  
### Building for release
- ``cargo build --release`` allows you to build the "release" version of your binary, which complies it with optimizations. This allows your rust code to run faster, but makes the build time longer.
- all this cargo setup might seem like overkill for now, but will serve very helpful as your projects grow in size and complexity.