# Chapter 3.1: Common Programming Concepts
- In this chapter we will learn:
    - concepts that appear in almost every programming language, and how they work in rust.
        - variables 
        - basic types 
        - functions 
        - comments
        - control flow

## Keywords
 - Like most languages, rust has a set of keywords that are reserved for use by the language only. You **cannot use keywords as the names of functions or variables**

## Variables and Mutability
- In rust, variables are **immutable** by default.
- This is the languages way of encouraging you to take advantage of the safety and easy concurrency that Rust offers.
- Rust generally encourages you to favor immutability.
- Immutable values can't be changed after making them
- consider the following code:
```Rust
fn main() {
    let x = 5;
    println!("The value of x is: {x}");
    x = 6;
    println!("The value of x is: {x}");
}
```
- we never used the mut keyword on x, so when we go to compile this code
```
$ cargo run
   Compiling variables v0.1.0 (file:///projects/variables)
error[E0384]: cannot assign twice to immutable variable `x`
 --> src/main.rs:4:5
  |
2 |     let x = 5;
  |         -
  |         |
  |         first assignment to `x`
  |         help: consider making this binding mutable: `mut x`
3 |     println!("The value of x is: {x}");
4 |     x = 6;
  |     ^^^^^ cannot assign twice to immutable variable

For more information about this error, try `rustc --explain E0384`.
error: could not compile `variables` due to previous error
```
- the compiler in rust is super cool and friendly and wants to make sure you aren't making your computer explode.

- ``cannot assign twice to immutable variable x`` means you're re-assigning a immutable variable
- if your variable's value is expected to never change and *does*, it can lead to very hard to track errors.
- Rust won't let you write unsafe code 
- to make a variable mutable, use the ``mut`` keyword

```Rust
fn main() {
    let mut x = 5;
    println!("The value of x is: {x}");
    x = 6;
    println!("The value of x is: {x}");
}
```
- the program now compiles yipeee


## Constants
```Rust
const THREE_HOURS_IN_SECONDS: u32 = 60 * 60 * 3;
```
- Like non mut variables, constants are assigned a value once and cannot be overwritten, but they aren't the same thing.
- you make consts with the ``const`` keyword, you can't make them mutable
- the type of the value must be annotated.
- constants can be declared in any scope, outside any function.
- consts must also be a constant expression, not somthing that could only be computed at runtime
- the rust naming convention is all caps with underscores in between
- only certain operations can be used when defining constants
- naming hard-coded values as constants can help make your code maintainable and manageable

## Shadowing
- You can declare variables with the same name an existing one
- it's called shadowing
- the shadowed variable overshadows the existing one, the compiler can only see the highest value overshadow.
- the shadowing goes away when you leave the scope in which the shadow was defined in.
```Rust
fn main() {
    let x = 5;

    let x = x + 1;

    {
        let x = x * 2;
        println!("The value of x in the inner scope is: {x}");
    }

    println!("The value of x is: {x}");
}
```
- this program binds ``x`` to 5
- it then makes a new variable ``x``, that's equal to ``x + 1``, so x is 6
- an **inner scope** is created with curly braces, and x is re-defined to be x * 2
- x was already shadowed to be 6, so x * 2 would be 12
- we leave the inner scope, so the value goes back to being 6
  
```
$ cargo run
   Compiling variables v0.1.0 (file:///projects/variables)
    Finished dev [unoptimized + debuginfo] target(s) in 0.31s
     Running `target/debug/variables`
The value of x in the inner scope is: 12
The value of x is: 6
```
- Shadowing a value isn't like making it mutable, you need to re-define the value every time with the ``let`` keyword each time
- using let lets us make a few transformations on a variable but maintain it's immutability 
- we're also making a new variable when we use ``let``, the compiler forget's about every value that isn't the most recently shadowed
- for example, say we ask a user to show how many spaces they'd want between some text
```Rust
    let spaces = "   ";
    let spaces = spaces.len();
```
- the first spaces variable is a string and the 2nd is a number type 
- this allows us to change the type and abandon the string variable when it's no longer helpful to us

# 3.2 Data Types
- every variable in rust is a certain data type, which tells the compiler what kind of data is in that variable.
- rust is a **statically typed** language, meaning the compiler needs to know the types of all variables at compile time.
- the compiler can infer some types based on the entered value, but if just entering a value makes it ambiguous (like a number), you'll need to define it explicitly

```Rust
let guess: u32 = "42".parse().expect("Not a number!");
```
if we don't put the ``: u32``, you'll get an error from lack of type annotation

```
$ cargo build
   Compiling no_type_annotations v0.1.0 (file:///projects/no_type_annotations)
error[E0282]: type annotations needed
 --> src/main.rs:2:9
  |
2 |     let guess = "42".parse().expect("Not a number!");
  |         ^^^^^
  |
help: consider giving `guess` an explicit type
  |
2 |     let guess: _ = "42".parse().expect("Not a number!");
  |              +++

For more information about this error, try `rustc --explain E0282`.
error: could not compile `no_type_annotations` due to previous error
```
## Scalar Types
- a scalar type represents a single value
- rust has four primary scalar types: integers, floating-point numbers, Booleans, and characters
  
### Integer Types
- An integer is a whole number. We used an integer in ch2, the ``u32``, the u means the number is unsigned, i means a value is signed, the number represents the length of the value, from 8 bit to 128-bit (also arch length but idk what that is)
- signed integers use the two's complement algorithm to manage the negative sign
- the arch sign is a 64-bit int or a 32-bit int depending on your pc cpu
-  to designate the type of a number in the number itself, you can include the type as a suffix, like ``57u8``.
-  numbers can also use underscores to make them easier to read, like ``1_000_000`` instead of ``1000000``
-  you can also use other symbols to denaote non base-10 numbers

|Number Literal  |Example  |
|---|---|
|Decimal (base 10)  |98_222 |
|Hex (base 16)  |0xff |
|Octal (base 8)  |0o77 |
|Binary (base 2)  |0b1111_000 |
|Byte (u8 only)  |0o77 |

- so how do you know which type of integer to use? 
- If you aren't sure, sticking to rust defaults are a good idea
- rust defaults all integer types to ``i32``, the primary use for ``i/usize`` is when you're indexing some sort of collection

#### Interger overflow
- if you set an interger outside it's possible range (setting a ``u8`` int to 256) you'll get an integer overflow. 
- This will cause one of two behaviors:
  - rust will **panic**, this is when a programs exits with an error.
  - if you're in release mode by compiling with the ``--release`` flag, rust doesn't check for integer overflow that could make it panic.
  - instead rust preforms **two's complement wrapping**, which means the compiler wraps any values past the max back around to the minimum. being one value over (256) would wrap to 0, two values over (257) would wrap to 1, and so on.
- relying on interger wrapping is considered an error. don't do that
- if overflow is somthing to be concerned about, there are methods to help you manage it
  - wrap in all modes with the ``wrapping_*`` methods, like ``wrapping_add``
  - return the None value if there is overflow with the ``checked_*`` methods.
  - Return the value and a boolean indicating whether there was overflow with the ``overflowing_*`` methods.
  - Saturate at the values min or max with ``saturating_*`` methods

### Floating-Point Numbers
- these are numbers with decimal points
- there are two types of floats in rust, ``f32`` and ``f64``, which are 32 bits and 64 bits in size, respectively.
- the default type is ``f32``
- all floats are signed
```Rust
fn main() {
    let x = 2.0; // f64

    let y: f32 = 3.0; // f32
}
```
Floats are represented according to the IEEE-754 Standard. The ``f32`` type is a single-precision float, and the ``f64`` has double precision.

### Numeric Operations
- rust supports basic math arithmetic operations you'd expect to be able to do with numbers.
- + - * / %
```Rust
fn main() {
    // addition
    let sum = 5 + 10;

    // subtraction
    let difference = 95.5 - 4.3;

    // multiplication
    let product = 4 * 30;

    // division
    let quotient = 56.7 / 32.2;
    let truncated = -5 / 3; // Results in -1

    // remainder
    let remainder = 43 % 5;
}
```
- these operations return a single value that is then bound to the variable 

### The Boolean Type
- As in most other programming languages, a Boolean type in rust can be either true or false.
- booleans are one byte in size
- use ``bool`` to denote a boolean
```Rust
fn main() {
    let t = true;

    let f: bool = false; // with explicit type annotation
}
```

### The character Type
the ``char`` is the most primitive alphabetic type.
```Rust
fn main() {
    let c = 'z';
    let z: char = 'ℤ'; // with explicit type annotation
    let heart_eyed_cat = '😻';
}
```
- chars use single quotes, unlike string literals that use double quotes
- a char is 4 bytes in size and represents a Unicode Scalar value, meaning it can represent more then just ASCII.
- UTF-8 is weird and "chars" as we intuit them aren't exactly the same, but we'll get back to that later.

## Compund Types
- compound types can group multiple values into one type. Rust has two primitive compound types: Tuples and Arrays

### Tuples
- tuples are a general way of grouping together a number of values with a variety of types into one compound type. tuples have a fixed length: they cannot grow or shrink in size once declared
- each value can be a different type, as long as all the types are defined
```Rust
fn main() {
    let tup: (i32, f64, u8) = (500, 6.4, 1);
}
```
- all of the values are bound to the ``tup`` variable, and they can be destructured and assigned to other variables like so
```Rust
fn main() {
    let tup = (500, 6.4, 1);

    let (x, y, z) = tup;

    println!("The value of y is: {y}");
}
``` 
we can also use period notation and it's index to return a value
```Rust
fn main() {
    let x: (i32, f64, u8) = (500, 6.4, 1);

    let five_hundred = x.0;

    let six_point_four = x.1;

    let one = x.2;
}
``` 
- Tuples without any values are called a ``unit``, they're written as () in value and type, and return an empty type.

### Arrays
- Rust arrays must all be the same type and have a fixed length
```Rust
fn main() {
    let a = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5];
}
```
- They store data on the stack rather then the heap (we'll discuss this later) or when you have a fixed list of elements.
- if you're looking for the ability to grow or shrink in size, then use a ``vector`` instead.
```Rust
let a: [i32; 5] = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]; // the type and number of elements
let a = [3; 5]; // the default value and the number of instances, same as [3,3,3,3,3]
let first = a[0]; // use square bracket notation to return the value at that index
let second = a[1];
```
#### Invalid Array Element Access
- consdier this code, similar to the chapter 2 project
```Rust
use std::io;

fn main() {
    let a = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5];

    println!("Please enter an array index.");

    let mut index = String::new();

    io::stdin()
        .read_line(&mut index)
        .expect("Failed to read line");

    let index: usize = index
        .trim()
        .parse()
        .expect("Index entered was not a number");

    let element = a[index];

    println!("The value of the element at index {index} is: {element}");
}
```
- enter a value that isn't in the index and you'll get
```
thread 'main' panicked at 'index out of bounds: the len is 5 but the index is 10', src/main.rs:19:19
note: run with `RUST_BACKTRACE=1` environment variable to display a backtrace
```
- the program exists with a runtime error
- rust checks if the index you're asking for is less than the length of the array
- if the index is greater or equal to it, rust will panic.
- this check has to happen at runtime, especially when the value it's looking up is defined by the user.
- this is an example of rusts memory safety, in many other low level languages, this check isn't done.
- if you use an out of bounds index, other languages will let you access unsafe memory.